---
title: "Serpent: Scalable and Efficient Image Restoration via Multi-scale Structured State Space Models"
collection: publications
permalink: /publications/2024-03-26-serpent
excerpt: 'Sepehri, M. S., Fabian, Z., Soltanolkotabi, M., 2024, <i>arXiv:2403.17902</i>'
date: 2024-03-26

---

Mohammad Shahab Sepehri, Zalan Fabian, Mahdi Soltanolkotabi<br>
<i>arXiv:2403.17902</i>, 2024

The landscape of computational building blocks of efficient image restoration architectures is dominated by a combination of convolutional processing and various attention mechanisms. However, convolutional filters, while efficient, are inherently local and therefore struggle with modeling long-range dependencies in images. In contrast, attention excels at capturing global interactions between arbitrary image regions, but suffers from a quadratic cost in image dimension. In this work, we propose Serpent, an efficient architecture for high-resolution image restoration that combines recent advances in state space models (SSMs) with multi-scale signal processing in its core computational block. SSMs, originally introduced for sequence modeling, can maintain a global receptive field with a favorable linear scaling in input size. We propose a novel hierarchical architecture inspired by traditional signal processing principles, that converts the input image into a collection of sequences and processes them in a multi-scale fashion. Our experimental results demonstrate that Serpent can achieve reconstruction quality on par with state-of-the-art techniques, while requiring orders of magnitude less compute (up to 150 fold reduction in FLOPS) and a factor of up to *5x* less GPU memory while maintaining a compact model size. The efficiency gains achieved by Serpent are especially notable at high image resolutions. 

<a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.17902" class="btn btn--inverse btn--large">
<i class="ai ai-arxiv ai-lg "></i> arXiv</a>

<b>Recommended citation</b>

Sepehri, M. S., Fabian, Z., Soltanolkotabi, M., 2024, Serpent: Scalable and Efficient Image Restoration via Multi-scale Structured State Space Models, <i> arXiv:2403.17902</i>
{: .notice}

<b>BibTeX<b>

```bibtex
@article{sepehri2024serpent,
  title={Serpent: Scalable and Efficient Image Restoration via Multi-scale Structured State Space Models},
  author={Sepehri, Mohammad Shahab and Fabian, Zalan and Soltanolkotabi, Mahdi},
  journal={arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.17902},
  year={2024}
}
```
